SEP 200 - Extensible type objects ("C-level duck typing")
=========================================================

======   ====================
Author   Dag Sverre Seljebotn
Status   Draft
======   ====================


Overview
--------

Often Python extensions needs to communicate things on the ABI level
about Python objects. In essence, one would like more slots in
``PyTypeObject`` for a custom purpose. Dictionary lookups are both
impractical, slow, and require the GIL.

The solution today is often to rely on
``PyObject_TypeCheck``. However, this works against standardizing
things across libraries, and creates one-to-many situations (only one
implementor of an API, but many consumers), rather than many-to-many
where there can be multiple implementors and multiple consumers of a
mutually agreed-upon standard (think "domain-specific PEP 3118s").

To overcome this problem, the usual approach is to propose a
PEP. However, that process is a) slow, b) not suitable for very
domain-specific tasks, and c) the result is not backwards-compatible
with earlier versions of Python.

This SEP introduces a metaclass on the C level which can be used to
provide effectively an unlimited number of custom slots in the
``PyTypeObject``, without relying on the normal type inheritance.

Examples uses:

 * Make the NumPy array truly polymorphic at the C level, exporting
   various vtables

 * Implement "fast callables" on the C-level, so that, e.g., Cython
   can call ``np.sin`` from C code with very little overhead, because
   it finds a function pointer with a "dd->d" signature tagged to the
   Python object

 * Standardize the Cython ``cdef class`` vtable

 * Standardize the internal memoryview representation of Cython
   (which is much faster than passing around ``Py_buffer``)


Implementation and lack of runtime dependency
---------------------------------------------

An implementation is available from
https://github.com/dagss/pyextensibletype

Every type exporting custom slots a) sets a new metaclass
``extensibletype`` as its metaclass (the ``ob_type->ob_type`` of the
object instance), and b) sets ``tp_flags`` bit 22, which we hijack for
this purpose (``ob_type->tp_flags |=
PyExtensibleType_TPFLAGS_IS_EXTENSIBLE``).  The metaclass is necesarry
to ensure that the custom slots table is inherited to subclasses
created in Python.  See the discussion section for justifications for
also using the flag bit.

Having a run-time dependency would be a significant disadvantage.
Instead, each participating provider library should contain the code for the
``extensibletype`` metaclass, provided in a short header file
(``include/extensibletype.h``). The first such module that gets initialized
puts the metaclass in the ``extensibletype_v1`` attribute in the ``_extensibletype``
module; later modules simply look up the metaclass there.

The custom slot table
---------------------

The metaclass is used to annotate each participating type with a table
of custom slots::

    typedef struct {
        uintptr_t id;
        void *data;
    } PyCustomSlot;

The ``id`` identifies the purpose of the slot.  Users querying an
object for a C-level interface scan this custom slot table in its type
for IDs they recognize. If an entry is found, ``data`` contains custom
information (defined by whoever defined the ID). It will often be a
pointer to a vtable, similar to slots like ``tp_as_buffer``.
Alternatively it can be casted to an integer representing an offset
that should be added to the instance ``PyObject*`` pointer in order to
look up some field.

Custom slots are not required to have any order; types are expected to
know which custom slot is most performance critical and put that first
in the list.

The ID comes in two categories, allocated ID and pointer
ID.

Allocated IDs
'''''''''''''

These are indicated by the least significant bit being 1.  The
ID space is partitioned as described in a separate section below.
Typically an ID is defined statically (e.g., a SEP 2xx defines it).
However, one can also reserve some parts of the ID space for
IDs allocated incrementally at run-time.


Pointer ID
''''''''''

These are casted memory addresses. The least significant bit must be
zero (i.e. an address aligned to at least 2 bytes, which should be the
case for any relevant object).  For instance, if there's a run-time
object specifying an "interface" that both the exporter and consumer
has access to, then they can use its address be able to communicate.

This SEP does not specify a specific scheme for such interface
creation or any other interning scheme. There could in fact be
multiple such schemes operating in parallel, since they never claim
the same address.

Interning through a table lookup (using running IDs) should use some
section of the ID space reserved for the interning mechanism instead.


Slot expected position
''''''''''''''''''''''

Slots can define an *expected position*, which consumers check before
scanning the entire list. For instance, if the NumPy array grows four
different C vtables, then the last one can indicate that it is
expected to be found at the 4th slot. Other less featureful array
types supporting that slot may pre-pad the table with ``{0x1, NULL}``
entries to put the slot in its preferred position.

The value of the expected position is in that the CPU can continue
execution with the slot in that position while the check goes on in
parallel in the CPU pipeline, *not* simply that fewer elements are
scanned.

The expected position scheme should mean there's almost never branch
misses for the typical usecases, since each group of custom slots
likely to be found together can negotiate on a position in the table
which the branch predictor should assume. For weirder objects that,
e.g., supports both NumPy vtables and acts as a native callable, there
will of course be conflicts and the table must be scanned.



Consumer API
------------

The consumer API is found in ``include/customslots.h``. It is meant to
be forwards-compatible with other ways of implementing the same
concepts (like a PEP), and so doesn't mention the metaclass
explicitly.

All functions can be called without holding the GIL, as long as one
has a guaranteed reference to the type object.

``PyCustomSlots_Check(obj)``
    Does the object support the protocol? Should be checked before using
    any of the other below.

``PyCustomSlots_Count(obj)``
    How many custom slots does the object support?

``PyCustomSlot *PyCustomSlots_Table(obj)``
    Get a pointer to the table

``PyCustomSlot *PyCustomSlots_Find(PyObject *obj, uintptr_t id, Py_ssize_t expected_pos)``
    Search the table for a matching slot; returns `NULL` if none is found.
    Pass the slots' expected position to `expected_pos` (or 0 if none
    is defined).


Provider API
------------

The provider API is found in ``include/extensibletype.h``, and
requires detailed knowledge of the implementation mechanism (so go read it).

To allow sub-classing Python side, the "object struct" must be based on
``PyHeapTypeObject`` rather than ``PyTypeObject``.
A typical type object follows (full example in ``demo/provider_c_code.h``).

**Note**: Even if the binary layout follows that of heap-allocated
types, there is nothing heap-allocated about a typical exporter type.
Also, in the example below, one could set ``tp_as_number`` to ``0``, but the
``PyNumberMethods`` struct would still have to be present.

::

    PyHeapExtensibleTypeObject MyProvider_Type =
    {
        /* PyHeapTypeObject etp_heaptype */
        {
            /* PyTypeObject ht_type */
            {
                PyVarObject_HEAD_INIT(0, 0),
                "myprovidertype", /*tp_name*/,
                sizeof(MyProvider_Object), /* tp_basicsize */
                0,                        /* tp_itemsize */
                ...
                &MyProvider_Type.etp_heaptype.as_number, /*tp_as_number*/
                &MyProvider_Type.etp_heaptype.as_sequence, /*tp_as_sequence*/
                &MyProvider_Type.etp_heaptype.as_mapping, /*tp_as_mapping*/
                ...
                &MyProvider_Type.etp_heaptype.as_buffer, /*tp_as_buffer*/
                ...
            },

            /* PyNumberMethods as_number */
            {
                0, /*nb_add*/
                ...
            },

            ...

            0, /* ht_name */
            0 /* ht_slots */
    
        }, /* end of PyHeapTypeObject */

        2, /* etp_custom_slot_count */
        my_custom_slots /* etp_custom_slot_table */
    };


``static int PyExtensibleType_Ready(PyHeapExtensibleTypeObject *type, Py_ssize_t slot_table_size)``
    Called to initialize a statically allocated extensible type.
    The ``slot_table_size`` is used in the case of subclassing
    another extensible type (see subclassing rules below).

    Before calling this function, ``etp_count`` and ``etp_custom_slots`` should
    be filled in.

    The function a) imports the ``extensibletype`` metaclass and
    sets ``type->ob_type`` to it, b) patches the ``etp_custom_slots`` table in
    response to inheritance, c) calls ``PyType_Ready``,
    d) updates ``tp_flags``.

    **Note**: In the current implementation, subclassing from another
    extensible type (step d) is simply not implemented, and will raise
    an exception. This support can be added when it is needed.

``PyTypeObject *PyExtensibleType_Import()``
    Get hold of the ``extensibletype`` metaclass directly. There's normally no
    need to call this.
    

Subclassing
'''''''''''

**Statically allocated C subclasses:** Since ``etp_custom_slots`` is
statically allocated, it should be over-allocated and padded with
slots with ``0`` as ID. The number of non-zero slots should be filled
in ``etp_count``, while the table size is passed to
``PyExtensibleType_Ready``. The table is then modified to inherit the
custom slots just like the built-in slots:

 - Slots are inherited from the parent class by prepending them to the
   table. The (id, flags, data)-struct is simply copied by value -- it
   is assumed that the data pointer will stay alive

 - If the same ID is present in the custom slot table of the child,
   the parent slot is not inherited

 - If the final number of slots is larger than the count passed to
   ``PyExtensibleType_Ready``, an exception is raised.

**Heap-allocated Python classes:** The metaclass ensures that the custom
slots of the parent is copied also to Python classes inheriting from
classes with custom slots. However, there is no mechanism for changing
the table of custom slots (the table pointer is simply set to the
table of the superclass).

Libraries can however subclass the ``extensibletype`` metaclass in
order to (somehow) provide the ability for Python subclasses to
modify the table (like a ``__customslots__`` class attribute or
similar).

Benchmark results
-----------------

The penalty of a branch-predicted table lookup in a micro-benchmark
was 0.54 ns for one particular test on a 1.87 GHz (Intel Core i7 Q
840).

Changing to a format where the table was embedded directly, loosing
one pointer indirection, did not change the numbers at all.  Also,
because the var-object resizeability is already used up for the method
table in heap-allocated types, this would be somewhat intricated.

There was no difference between checking ``ob_type->tp_flags`` and
checking for a metaclass; ``ob_type->ob_type``.  For the metaclass
checking strategy, there was no difference between only being able to
match the metaclass itself, or also having the possibility of matching
a metaclass subclass (as long as that possibility isn't taken,
i.e. the direct match is ``likely``).



The custom slot ID space
------------------------

As mentioned above, when least significant bit is 1 the slot IDs
are statically assigned.

For static assignment we assume that the ``uintptr_t`` is at 
least 32 bits; any higher bits should always be 0.

The most significant 8 bits (of the lower 32) denote a
"registrar". Each registrar determines the use of the remaining 23
bits, but a recommendation, from most to least significant, is:

 * 8 bits: Registrar (required)
 * 16 bits: Which custom slot "idea"
 * 7 bits: Which backwards-incompatible version of the idea
 * 1 bit: Should be set to 1 for static IDs (***PS! required***)


Special IDs
'''''''''''

 * 0x00000000: Reserved for now
 * 0x00000001: Use if pre-padding the table is needed

ID space (most significant 8 bits)
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

 * 0x00: Reserved
 * 0x01: For internal/personal use, never use in released libraries
 * 0x02: Cython
 * 0x03: NumFOCUS SEPs, NumPy, SciPy
 * 0x04-...: Whoever asks


Discussion
----------

Hijacking bit 22 in ``tp_flags`` has the following advantages:

 - Consumers don't have to call any ``PyCustomSlots_Init`` to import
   a reference to the metaclass
 
 - Consumers don't have to carry along a metaclass implementation just
   in case they are imported before the first provider. (Keep in mind
   that if the NumPy C API is refactored to be based on this mechanism,
   there will be a lot of consumers.)

 - It is (probably) microscopically faster if you need to subclass the
   metaclass for some reason. No effect if you're not subclassing the
   metaclass though (due to branch prediction working its wonders)

The disadvantage is of course that we hijack a flag, and we have no guarantee
that other Python libraries are not doing the same.

If a new Python version uses all available flag bits (and
this SEP is not accomodated by any PEPs in the meantime), one can
switch to walking ``ob_type`` and ``tp_base`` rather than checking
``tp_flags``.

As for inclusion as a PEP, that only works for new Python versions.
Python-dev was consulted on the question [#]_, and Nick Coghlan's
response [#]_ indicated that a PEP might not be entirely impossible
but should require a working implementation based on meta-classes
first.


.. [#] http://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2012-May/119481.html
.. [#] http://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2012-May/119518.html
