SEP 201: Native dispatches through Python callables
===================================================

======   ====================
Author   Dag Sverre Seljebotn
Status   Draft
======   ====================

Overview
--------

Many callable objects are simply wrappers around native code.  This
holds for any Cython function, f2py functions, manually
written CPython extensions, Numba, etc.

Obviously, when native code calls other native code, it would be nice
to skip the significant cost of boxing and unboxing all the arguments.

Motivating example (looking a year or two into the future)::

    @numba
    def f(x): return 2 * x

    @cython.inline
    def g(x : cython.double): return 3 * x

    from fortranmod import h

    print f(3)
    print g(3)
    print h(3)
    print scipy.integrate.quad(f, 0.2, 3) # fast callback!
    print scipy.integrate.quad(g, 0.2, 3) # fast callback!
    print scipy.integrate.quad(h, 0.2, 3) # fast callback!


Boundaries of this SEP
----------------------

We include the possibility that an exporter has many
signatures/instantiations (e.g., ``np.sin`` may export a signature per
floating point type, real and complex).

We include the possibility that a JIT caller may want to inspect
the signature list of an object and use it in a type-inference scheme.
Therefore we export a full table of function signatures, rather than
having a ``get_function_pointer`` function.

For a given call, the exporter is assumed to have a fixed set of
signatures.  We exclude the possibility of negotiating signatures
where both the caller and callee can adapt (JIT<->JIT). A situation
where the callee can generate new instantiations depending on the
needs of the caller could become quite involved, so we simply push
that off until a possible later SEP.

However, the function table of an object can be modified on the fly
(for instance whenever a new instantiation is requested by some other
scheme).


Description of custom slot
--------------------------

You typically have a general type for your callable (e.g., ufuncs, or
a ``CyFunction`` type), while each instance represents a different
callable with a different signature. Therefore the information is
tagged to the object, not the type.
`SEP 200 <https://github.com/numfocus/sep/blob/master/sep200.rst>`_ is
used to annotate the objects.

IDs:
 
::

    #define PYCUSTOMSLOT_NATIVECALLABLE_ID 0x04000001
    #define PYCUSTOMSLOT_NATIVECALLABLE_FAVPOS 0

The slot data should be interpreted as an offset against the ``PyObject*``,
at which location a **pointer** to the table can be found.
A snippet of code says more than thousand words::

    PyCustomSlot *slot = PyCustomSlots_Find(obj, PYCUSTOMSLOT_NATIVECALLABLE_ID,
                                            PYCUSTOMSLOT_NATIVECALLABLE_FAVPOS);
    if (slot) {
        PyNativeCallableTable **tableptr = (char*)obj + custom_slot->data.objoffset;
        PyNativeCallableTable *table = *tableptr;
        ...
    }

It is OK to access the native-call table without holding the GIL. This
should of course only be used to call functions that state in their
signature that they don't need the GIL.

This is important for JITted callables who would like to rewrite their
table as more specializations gets added; if one needs to reallocate
the table, the old table must linger along long enough that all
threads that are currently accessing it are done with it.


Native dispatch table
---------------------

The final format for the descriptor table is not agreed upon yet; this
sums up the major alternatives. Benchmarks indicate that the alternatives
perform the same, it is primarily a question of taste as both approaches
has some drawbacks.

In any case, the idea is that there is a table that maps
function signatures to function pointers that can be called.
The signatures are simple strings (e.g., ``"iid"`` for ``int f(int, double)``)
and described in more detail below.

Some principles:

 * The call should be very fast (so that Cython doesn't need to do function
   pointer caching, which anyway doesn't work in all situations)

 * As described above, a JIT should be able to parse the signature
   format string

 * The function table should ideally be useable from non-Python code,
   and, e.g., as easily as possible used in Julia for Julia<->Python bridge


Approach 1: Comparison of deterministic keys
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The idea is to store the full signatures and the function pointers
together in the same memory area, which requires variable-size
entries; but still have some structure to allow for quick scanning
through the list.
 
The table is composed of multiple variable-size entries, each
on the following form:

=== ===============================================================
.   First 8 bytes of signature (incl. "start signature mark")
.   [Next 16 bytes of signature] (repeat ``n`` times for ``n>=0``)
.   8 bytes of ``funcptr``
=== ===============================================================

The idea is then to encode the signature in such a way that callers
looking for a specific signature can scan the table in 16-byte
increments, ignoring the size of each entry.

Some notes:

 * The ``funcptr`` is 8 bytes also on 32-bit systems (to keep the
   table structure stable across platforms)

 * A terminating 0 must be included on all signatures (even if
   that is what makes it spill over)

 * The encoding must be picked so that 
   3rd, 5th, 7th, ... 8-byte parts of long signatures do not
   collide with the beginning of any signature

**Encoding:** Optionally, the approach above can be made efficient for
larger signatures by using a more efficient encoding than ASCII. E.g.,
an encoding could use 4 bits for the 12 most common symbols and 8 bits
for 64 symbols (for a total of 78 symbols), of which some could be
letter combinations ("Zd", "T{"). This should be reasonably simple to
encode and decode.

The SEP should provide C routines in a header file to work with the
encoded signatures.

**Flag information:** Since it is trivial to compare keys under a mask
while scanning, flags can be embedded in the signature. For instance,
if you don't care whether the function needs the GIL or not, because
you have the GIL, then that information could be masked out while
comparing.

Approach 2: Interned strings
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Do the obvious thing, but rely on interning the signature strings
for speed::

    typedef struct {
        char *signature; /* interned! */
        uintptr_t flags; /* see section below */
        void *funcptr;
    } PyNativeCallableEntry;

    typedef struct {
        Py_ssize_t count;
        PyNativeCallableEntry entries[0]; /* variable-size */
    } PyNativeCallableTable;

The interning of the signature pointers is vital to performance of the
lookups. In order to intern a signature, there must be a run-time
string interning registry. Ideally, this would be GIL-less and usable
for non-Python code. Also ideally, one pulls this off without a common
runtime dependency.

E.g., one could have::

    typedef struct {
        char* (*acquired_interned_string)(void *self, char *str, char **errmsg);
        void (*release_interned_string)(void *self, char *interned_str);
    } interner_interface;

Then, each exporter of native-callables would need to carry an
implementation of this and rendezvous on it it in a central location
(since a common NumPy and Cython dependency would be a major
drawback).

**Flag information:** One can no longer mask out flag information (e.g.,
whether function requires GIL or not).

Therefore we use a separate flag field in the record. We can require
that the highest 8 bits indicate ABI versioning (code should for now
additionally require them to be 0x00 or ignore the record) and the
lowest 24 bits indicate properties about the function ("requires GIL",
"will acquire GIL", "can raise exception").

(Alternatively, the lowest three bits of the signature pointer could
be used for flags...)


Discussion of table approaches
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

**On approach 1:** If it's hard to explain, it's a bad idea.

On the other hand, the comparison of deterministic keys has the
advantage that it is entirely state-less. One does not need to
remember to intern and release the strings, and one can in principle
store the table as a C literal.

**On approach 2:** The interning scheme has the
disadvantage that a relatively complex interning mechanism. It could
be made simpler if one drops the requirements for a GIL-less and
Python-less interning registry.

A compromise could be to use the API above, but initially require the
GIL, so that the backing implementation could use Python dicts (one to
do string->string mapping, and one id(string)->refcount mapping). Then
the GIL requirement could be lifted eventually.

**Other approaches:**
Some other approaches has been discussed and ruled out. Storing a
cryptographic hash makes it impossible for JIT callers to parse the
signature information and use it for type inference. Storing an
interned ``PyObject*`` means that the table cannot be passed around
as easily in C code without a Python dependency (and the cost to
avoid that is quite minor).


Signature strings
-----------------

The work on fully specifying the signature strings is tedious and best
done while implementing. It should probably be done by the first
person to implement this SEP. Also, it will never be finished; one can
add features and meanings as long as the signature format doesn't
conflict with existing encodings.

Example: The function::

    int f(double x, float* y);

would, e.g., have the signature string ``"i:d&f"``.

Return value and arguments would follow the PEP3118 extensions of the
struct-module format string, but with some modifications:

 * The format should be canonical and fit for ``strcmp`` comparison:
   No whitespace, no field names, no alignment information for
   arguments and some canonical choice of alignment information for
   struct arguments
  
 * Additions made as they are needed. Example 1: Support for
   Cython-specific constructs like memoryview slices (so that arrays
   with strides and shape can be passed faster than passing an
   ``"O"``). Example 2: The exception return code is an
   out-argument.
